### Fixed:

-   Fixed: [beb0302b](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/beb0302b4fec0758062141e727bf1bbcfd4d4b98) leader should not commit when there is no replication to voters.; by drdr xp; 2021-08-18

    When there is no replication to voters but there are replications to
    non-voters, the leader did not check non-voters for a quorum but just
    commits a log at once.

    This cause the membership change log from a single node always commits.
    E.g. start node 0, and non-voter 1, 2; then `change_membership({0, 1, 2})`,
    It just commits the joint-log at once.
    But according to raft paper, it should await a quorum of {0} and a
    quorum of {0, 1, 2}.

### Changed:

-   Changed: [6350514c](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/6350514cc414dc9d7e9aa0e21ea7b546ed223235) change-membership should be log driven but not channel driven; by drdr xp; 2021-08-18

    A membership change involves two steps: the joint config phase and the
    final config phase.
    Each phase has a corresponding log involved.

    Previously the raft setup several channel to organize this workflow,
    which makes the logic hard to understand and introduces complexity when
    restarting or leadership transferred: it needs to re-establish the channels and tasks.

    According to the gist of raft, all workflow should be log driven.
    Thus the new approach:
    - Write two log(the joint and the final) at once it receives a
      change-membership request.
    - All following job is done according to just what log is committed.

    This simplifies the workflow and makes it more reliable and intuitive to
    understand.

    Related changes:

    - When `change_membership` is called, append 2 logs at once.

    - Introduce universal response channel type to send back a message when
      some internal task is done: `ResponseTx`, and a universal response
      error type: `ResponseError`.

    - Internal response channel is now an `Option<ResponseTx>`, since the
      first step of membership change does not need to respond to the
      caller.

    - When a new leaser established, if the **last** log is a joint config
      log, append a final config log to let the partial change-membership be
      able to complete.

      And the test is added.

    - Removed membership related channels.

    - Refactor: convert several func from async to sync.
