### Changed:

-   Changed: [79a39970](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/79a39970855d80e1d3b761fadbce140ecf1da59e) to get last_log and membership, Storage should search for both logs and state machines.; by drdr xp; 2021-08-24

    Why:

    depending on the impl, a RaftStore may have logs that are included in
    the state machine still present.
    This may be caused by a non-transactional impl of the store, e.g.
    installing snapshot and removing logs are not atomic.

    Thus when searching for last_log or last membership, a RaftStore should
    search for both logs and state machine, and returns the greater one
    that is found.

    - Test: add test to prove these behaviors,
      which includes: `get_initial_state()` and `get_membership()`.

    - Refactor: Make store tests a suite that could be applied to other
      impl.

-   Changed: [07d71c67](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/07d71c67a40766a302436f781294da931e1bc7d0) RaftStore::delete_logs_from() use range instead of (start, end); by drdr xp; 2021-08-28

-   Changed: [1c46a712](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/1c46a71241ad7ca6bcf69e35c27355a0ed185002) RaftStore::get_log_entries use range as arg; add try_get_log_entry() that does not return error even when defensive check is on; by drdr xp; 2021-08-28

### Added:

-   Added: [420cdd71](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/420cdd716b2ffa167d0dfcd0c2c21578793df88e) add defensive check to MemStore; by drdr xp; 2021-08-28

-   Added: [ab6689d9](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/ab6689d951954e3adbe8eb427364cf9062da1425) RaftStore::get_last_log_id() to get the last known log id in log or state machine; by drdr xp; 2021-08-29

### Fixed:

-   Fixed: [6d53aa12](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/6d53aa12f66ecd08e81bcb055eb17387b835e2eb) too many(50) inconsistent log should not live lock append-entries; by drdr xp; 2021-08-31

    - Reproduce the bug that when append-entries, if there are more than 50
      inconsistent logs,  the responded `conflict` is always set to
      `self.last_log`, which blocks replication for ever.
      Because the next time append-entries use the same `prev_log_id`, it
      actually does not search backward for the first consistent log entry.

      https://github.com/drmingdrmer/async-raft/blob/79a39970855d80e1d3b761fadbce140ecf1da59e/async-raft/src/core/append_entries.rs#L131-L154

    The test to reproduce it fakes a cluster of node 0,1,2:
    R0 has 100 uncommitted log at term 2.
    R2 has 100 uncommitted log at term 3.

    ```
    R0 ... 2,99 2,100
    R1
    R2 ... 3,99, 3,00
    ```

    Before this fix, brings up the cluster, R2 becomes leader and will never sync any log to R0.

    The fix is also quite simple:

    - Search backward instead of searching forward, to find the last log
      entry that matches `prev_log_id.term`, and responds this log id to the
      leader to let it send next `append_entries` RPC since this log id.

    - If no such matching term is found, use the first log id it sees, e.g.,
      the entry at index `prev_log_id.index - 50` for next `append_entries`.

-   Fixed: [9540c904](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/9540c904da4ae005baec01868e01016f3bc76810) when append-entries, deleting entries after prev-log-id causes committed entry to be lost; by drdr xp; 2021-08-31

    Problem:

    When append-entries, raft core removes old entries after
    `prev_log_id.index`, then append new logs sent from leader.

    Since deleting then appending entries are not atomic(two calls to `RaftStore`),
    deleting consistent entries may cause loss of committed entries, if
    server crashes after the delete.

    E.g., an example cluster state with logs as following and R1 now is the leader:

    ```
    R1 1,1  1,2  1,3
    R2 1,1  1,2
    R3
    ```

    Committed entry `{1,2}` gets lost after the following steps:

    - R1 to R2: `append_entries(entries=[{1,2}, {1,3}], prev_log_id={1,1})`
    - R2 deletes 1,2
    - R2 crash
    - R2 is elected as leader with R3, and only see 1,1; the committed entry 1,2 is lost.

    Solution:

    The safe way is to skip every entry that are consistent to the leader.
    And delete only the inconsistent entries.

    Another issue with this solution is that:

    Because we cannot just delete `log[prev_log_id.index..]`, the commit index:
    - must be update only after append-entries,
    - and must point to a log entry that is consistent to leader.

    Or there could be chance applying an uncommitted entry:

    ```
    R0 1,1  1,2  3,3
    R1 1,1  1,2  2,3
    R2 1,1  1,2  3,3
    ```

    - R0 to R1 `append_entries: entries=[{1,2}], prev_log_id = {1,1}, commit_index = 3`
    - R1 accepted this `append_entries` request but was not aware of that entry {2,3} is inconsistent to leader.
      Updating commit index to 3 allows it to apply an uncommitted entries `{2,3}`.
