### Fixed:

-   Fixed: [d836d85c](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/d836d85c963f6763eb7e5a5c72fb81da3435bdb2) if there may be more logs to replicate, continue to call send_append_entries in next loop, no need to wait heartbeat tick; by lichuang; 2022-01-04

-   Fixed: [5a026674](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/5a026674617b5e4f5402ff148d261169fe392b24) defensive_no_dirty_log hangs tests; by YangKian; 2022-01-08

-   Fixed: [8651625e](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/8651625ed0c18354ff329a37f042f9471f333fa6) save leader_id if a higher term is seen when handling append-entries RPC; by 张炎泼; 2022-01-10

    Problem:

    A follower saves hard state `(term=msg.term, voted_for=None)`
    when a `msg.term > local.term` when handling append-entries RPC.

    This is quite enough to be correct but not perfect. Correct because:

    - In one term, only an established leader will send append-entries;

    - Thus, there is a quorum voted for this leader;

    - Thus, no matter what `voted_for` is saved, it is still correct. E.g.
      when handling append-entries, a follower node could save hard state
      `(term=msg.term, voted_for=Some(ANY_VALUE))`.

    The problem is that a follower already knows the legal leader for a term
    but still does not save it. This leads to an unstable cluster state: The
    test sometimes fails.

    Solution:

    A follower always save hard state with the id of a known legal leader.

-   Fixed: [1a781e1b](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/1a781e1be204ce165248ea0d075880cd06d8fb00) when lack entry, the snapshot to build has to include at least all purged logs; by 张炎泼; 2022-01-18

-   Fixed: [a0a94af7](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/a0a94af7612bd9aaae5a5404325887b16d7a96ae) span.enter() in async loop causes memory leak; by 张炎泼; 2022-06-17

    It is explained in:
    https://onesignal.com/blog/solving-memory-leaks-in-rust/

### Changed:

-   Changed: [c9c8d898](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/c9c8d8987805c29476bcfd3eab5bff83e00e342e) trait RaftStore: remove get_membership_config(), add last_membership_in_log() and get_membership() with default impl; by drdr xp; 2022-01-04

    Goal: minimize the work for users to implement a correct raft application.

    Now RaftStorage provides default implementations for `get_membership()`
    and `last_membership_in_log()`.

    These two methods just can be implemented with other basic user impl
    methods.

    - fix: #59

-   Changed: [abda0d10](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/abda0d1015542ad701f52fb1a6ca7f997a81102a) rename RaftStorage methods do_log_compaction: build_snapshot, delete_logs_from: delete_log; by 张炎泼; 2022-01-15

-   Changed: [a52a9300](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/a52a9300e5be96a73a7c76ce4095f723d8750837) RaftStorage::get_log_state() returns last purge log id; by 张炎泼; 2022-01-16

    -   Change: `get_log_state()` returns the `last_purged_log_id` instead of the `first_log_id`.
        Because there are some cases in which log are empty:
        When a snapshot is install that covers all logs,
        or when `max_applied_log_to_keep` is 0.

        Returning `None` is not clear about if there are no logs at all or
        all logs are deleted.

        In such cases, raft still needs to maintain log continuity
        when repilcating. Thus the last log id that once existed is important.
        Previously this is done by checking the `last_applied_log_id`, which is
        dirty and buggy.

        Now an implementation of `RaftStorage` has to maintain the
        `last_purged_log_id` in its store.

    -   Change: Remove `first_id_in_log()`, `last_log_id()`, `first_known_log_id()`,
        because concepts are changed.

    -   Change: Split `delete_logs()` into two method for clarity:

        `delete_conflict_logs_since()` for deleting conflict logs when the
        replication receiving end find a conflict log.

        `purge_logs_upto()` for cleaning applied logs

    -   Change: Rename `finalize_snapshot_installation()` to `install_snapshot()`.

    -   Refactor: Remove `initial_replicate_to_state_machine()`, which does nothing
        more than a normal applying-logs.

    -   Refactor: Remove `enum UpdateCurrentLeader`. It is just a wrapper of Option.

-   Changed: [7424c968](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/7424c9687f2ae378ff4647326fcd53f2c172b50b) remove unused error MembershipError::Incompatible; by 张炎泼; 2022-01-17

-   Changed: [beeae721](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/beeae721d31d89e3ad98fe66376d8edf57f3dcd0) add ChangeMembershipError sub error for reuse; by 张炎泼; 2022-01-17
