### Fixed:

-   Fixed: [86e2ccd0](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/86e2ccd071454f32b04dd4446c0eece6d4075580) a single Candidate should be able to vote itself.; by 张炎泼; 2022-01-20

    A Candidate should check if it is the only member in a cluster before
    sending vote request.
    Otherwise a single node cluster does work.

-   Fixed: [4015cc38](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/4015cc388c9259af7399bfc89715deb0c1c9f9bb) a Candidate should revert to Follower at once when a higher vote is seen; by 张炎泼; 2022-02-03

    When a Candidate saw a higher vote, it store it at once.
    Then no more further granted votes are valid to this candidate,
    because vote they granted are changed.

    Thus it was wrong to compare `last_log_id` before deciding if to revert to
    Follower.
    The right way is to revert to Follower at once and stop the voting
    procedure.

-   Fixed: [1219a880](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/1219a8801b5a7a2b7f2af10719852cb696e42903) consistency issue between ReplicationCore.last_log_id and last_log_state.last_log_id; by 张炎泼; 2022-02-28

-   Fixed: [efdc321d](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/efdc321dad07344360732da277f63150e5cfc4d0) a leader should report leader metrics with value `Update::AsIs` instead of `Update::Update(None)`. Otherwise it mistakenly purges metrics about replication; by 张炎泼; 2022-04-01

-   Fixed: [797fb9b1](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/797fb9b1a8d2ed4216f07a791a3cf72242442711) update replication metrics only when the replication task stopped, to provide a consistent view of RaftMetrics; by 张炎泼; 2022-06-04

-   Fixed: [918b48bc](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/918b48bcbf27aae83a8c4e63fb10ad3b33520ea1) #424 wrong range when searching for membership entries: `[end-step, end)`.; by 张炎泼; 2022-07-03

    The iterating range searching for membership log entries should be
    `[end-step, end)`, not `[start, end)`.
    With this bug it will return duplicated membership entries.

    - Related: #424

-   Fixed: [8594807c](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/8594807c4cd15f5ac3459471fd33e548e94dd660) metrics has to be updated last; by 张炎泼; 2022-07-13

    Otherwise the application receives updated metrics while the internal raft
    state is still stale.

-   Fixed: [59ddc982](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/59ddc982100a390efd66632adbf25edd2c6e6a3c) avoid creating log-id with uninitialized `matched.leader_id`.; by 张炎泼; 2022-07-26

    When waiting for a newly added learner to become up to date,
    it tries to compare last-log-id and the reported `matched` replication
    state.
    But the `matched` may have not yet receive any update and is
    uninitialized, in such case, it tries to create a temp LogId with
    `leader_id(0, 0)`, which is illegal.

    The fix is simple: do not use log-id. Just calculating replication lag by log index.

    Add test to reproduce it: openraft/tests/membership/t99_issue_471_adding_learner_uses_uninit_leader_id.rs

    - Fix: #471

-   Fixed: [43dd8b6f](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/43dd8b6f1afd2febcc027505c5ee41775ad561a8) when leader reverts to follower, send error to waiting clients; by 张炎泼; 2022-08-06

    When a leader reverts to follower, e.g., if a higher vote is seen,
    it should inform waiting clients that leadership is lost.

-   Fixed: [71a290cd](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/71a290cd0a41c80e0bbbb455baa976a7f2945bc9) when handling append-entries, if `prev_log_id` is purged, it should not treat it as a **conflict**; by 张炎泼; 2022-08-14

    when handling append-entries, if `prev_log_id` is purged, it
    should not treat it as a **conflict** log and should not delete any
    log.

    This bug is caused by using `committed` as `last_applied`.
    `committed` may be smaller than `last_applied` when a follower just
    starts up.

    The solution is merging `committed` and `last_applied` into one field:
    `committed`, which is always greater than or equal the actually
    committed(applied).

-   Fixed: [674e78aa](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/674e78aa171626db0369c1f025e641abdc8f7264) potential inconsistency when installing snapshot; by 张炎泼; 2022-09-21

    The conflicting logs that are before `snapshot_meta.last_log_Id` should
    be deleted before installing a snapshot.

    Otherwise there is chance the snapshot is installed but conflicting logs
    are left in the store, when a node crashes.

-   Fixed: [4ea66acd](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/4ea66acd35f998251bced1ff25b40db8781d8d4b) stop tick task when shutting down Raft; by Matthias Wahl; 2022-09-27

-   Fixed: [56486a60](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/56486a60c63fa5da1b8fdb877306c725058b1892) Error after change_membership: `assertion failed: value > prev`: #584; by 张炎泼; 2022-10-29

    Problem:

    Error occurs after calling `change_membership()`: `assertion failed: value > prev`,
    when changing membership by converting a learner to a voter.

    Because the replication streams are re-spawned, thus progress reverts to
    zero. Then a reverted progress causes the panic.

    Solution:

    When re-spawning replications, remember the previous progress.

    - Fix: #584

-   Fixed: [678af4a8](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/678af4a8191400a2936979bc809a7c7d37fbe660) when responding ForwardToLeader, make `leader_id` a None if the leader is no longer in the cluster; by 张炎泼; 2022-11-02

-   Fixed: [0023cff1](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/0023cff188df7654bf2e4e8980cc83307e93ec71) delay leader step down; by 张炎泼; 2022-11-06

    When a membership that removes the leader is committed,
    the leader continue to work for a short while before reverting to a learner.
    This way, let the leader replicate the `membership-log-is-committed` message to followers.

    Otherwise, if the leader step down at once, the follower might have to re-commit the membership log
    again.

    After committing the membership log that does not contain the leader,
    the leader will step down in the next `tick`.

-   Fixed: [ff9a9335](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/ff9a93357506b3f53d74046e87d887d8551e4d3b) it should make a node non-leader when restarting single node cluster; by 张炎泼; 2022-12-03

    A node should not set `server_state` to `Leader` when just starting up,
    even when it's the only voter in a cluster. It still needs several step
    to initialize leader related fields to become a leader.

    - Fix: #607

-   Fixed: [0e7ab5a7](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/0e7ab5a70877d72407942a2639c2f24bca64a48a) workaround cargo leaking SSL_CERT_FILE issue; by 张炎泼; 2022-12-09

    On Linux: command `cargo run` pollutes environment variables: It leaks
    `SSL_CERT_FILE` and `SSL_CERT_DIR` to the testing sub progress it runs.
    Which cause `reqwest` spending ~50 ms loading the certificates for every
    RPC.

    We just extend the RPC timeout to work around.

    - Fix: #550

-   Fixed: [cc8af8cd](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/cc8af8cd67d78118e0ea48dc5d1de3adf183e45a) last_purged_log_id is not loaded correctly; by 张炎泼; 2023-01-08

    - Fix: `last_purged_log_id` should be `None`, but not `LogId{index=0,
      ..}` when raft startup with a store with log at index 0.

      This is fixed by adding another field `next_purge` to distinguish
      `last_purged_log_id` value `None` and `LogId{index=0, ..}`, because
      `RaftState.log_ids` stores `LogId` but not `Option<LogId>`.

    - Add a wrapper `Valid<RaftState>` of `RaftState` to check if the state
      is valid every time accessing it. This check is done only when
      `debug_assertions` is turned on.

-   Fixed: [9dbbe14b](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/9dbbe14b91eee9e2ce4497a6c5c10f5df2e5913b) check_is_leader() should return at once if encountering StorageError; by 张炎泼; 2023-02-12

    Refactor: ExtractFatal is not used any more. Fatal error should only be
    raised by Command executor, no more by API handler. There is no need to
    extract Fatal error from an API error.

-   Fixed: [a80579ef](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/a80579efec75e8655b55e2532f81f38757419bcd) a stepped down leader should ignore replication progress message; by 张炎泼; 2023-02-12

-   Fixed: [c8fccb22](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/c8fccb2225862370ac5e4e7e27c9632f82f332d1) when adding a learner, ensure the last membership is committed; by 张炎泼; 2023-02-19

    Previously, when adding a learner to a Raft cluster, the last membership was not
    always marked as committed, which could cause issues when a follower tried to
    truncate logs by reverting to the last committed membership. To prevent this
    issue, we have updated the code to ensure the last membership is committed when
    adding a learner.

    In addition to this fix, we have also made several refactoring changes,
    including refining method names for trait `Coherent`, renaming
    `Membership::next_safe()` to `next_coherent()` for consistency, and updating
    enum `ChangeMembers` to include more variants for adding and removing learners.
    We have also removed `RaftCore::add_learner()` in favor of using
    `change_membership()` for all membership operations, and added a `ChangeHandler`
    to build new membership configurations for change-membership requests.

    Finally, we have updated the `Membership` API with a new method `new_with_nodes()`
    for building a new membership configuration, and moved the validation check
    out into a separate function, `ensure_valid()`. Validation is now done only
    when needed.

### Changed:

-   Changed: [86e2ccd0](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/86e2ccd071454f32b04dd4446c0eece6d4075580) `Wait::log_at_least()` use `Option<u64>` as the input log index, instead of using u64; by 张炎泼; 2022-01-20

-   Changed: [71a290cd](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/71a290cd0a41c80e0bbbb455baa976a7f2945bc9) remove `RaftState.last_applied`, use `committed` to represent the already committed and applied log id; by 张炎泼; 2022-08-14

-   Changed: [2254ffc5](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/2254ffc563946149eca1e0907993b2efdba8f65d) add sub error types of ReplicationError; by 张炎泼; 2022-01-20

    - Add sub errors such as Timeout and NetworkError.

    - Remove ReplicationError::IO, use StorageError instead.

-   Changed: [f08a3e6d](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/f08a3e6d09c85f3a10f033d94bf0213a723ad008) RaftNetwork return `RPCError` instead of anyhow::Error; by 张炎泼; 2022-01-23

    - When a remote error encountered when replication, the replication will
      be stopped at once.

    - Fix: #140

-   Changed: [d55fa625](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/d55fa62575cbf369b018e151b654b6a8905fdd87) add ConfigError sub error; remove anyhow; by 张炎泼; 2022-01-23

    - Fix: #144

-   Changed: [58f2491f](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/58f2491f3a6a90c95730fee4c176f34e526049db) `RaftStorage`: use `Vote` to replace `HardState`; by 张炎泼; 2022-01-25

    - Rename: save_hard_state() and read_hard_state() to save_vote() and read_vote().

    - Replace `term, node_id` pair with `Vote` in RaftCore and RPC struct-s.

-   Changed: [a68a9a9a](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/a68a9a9af9c8d32e81e51b974ec62c22bdce8048) use `term, node_id, index` to identify a log entry; by 张炎泼; 2022-01-26

-   Changed: [0b753622](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/0b7536221a7214756abf844049eae037b3c9ccfc) `Raft::add_learner()` accepts optional arg `Node`.; by 张炎泼; 2022-02-17

    When adding a learner, an optional `Node` can be provided to store
    additional info of a node in Membership.

    A common usage if to store node address in the Membership so that an
    application does not need another component to get address of a node
    when implementing `RaftNetwork`.

-   Changed: [5ba730c9](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/5ba730c96acffad122c33bca916a4d4034b3ef1d) Replace replication state in RaftMetrics with a reference to atomic values; by Ivan Schréter; 2022-02-22

-   Changed: [a76f41ac](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/a76f41ac058939d95f2df53013be3b68dc5b68ad) Extract RaftLogReader, RaftSnapshotBuilder from RaftStorage, split RaftNetwork and RaftNetworkFactory; by Ivan Schréter; 2022-02-22

    RaftStorage is now refactored to:
    - RaftLogReader to read data from the log in parallel tasks independent of the main Raft loop
    - RaftStorage to modify the log and the state machine (implements also RaftLogReader) intended to be used in the main Raft loop
    - RaftSnapshotBuilder to build the snapshot in background independent of the main Raft loop

    The RaftStorage API offers to create new RaftLogReader or RaftSnapshotBuilder on it.

    RaftNetwork is also refactored to:
    - RaftNetwork responsible for sending RPCs
    - RaftNetworkFactory responsible for creating instances of RaftNetwork for sending data to a particular node

-   Changed: [f40c2055](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/f40c205532b4e75384a6eaaebb601447001d13f4) Add a `RaftTypeConfig` trait to configure common types; by Ivan Schréter; 2022-02-25

-   Changed: [650e2352](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/650e23524b759219b9dea0d2fbe3e71859429115) Membership remove redundant field `learners`: the node ids that are in `Membership.nodes` but not in `Membership.configs` are learners; by 张炎泼; 2022-03-07

-   Changed: [81cd3443](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/81cd3443530a9ef260ded00f0a8b2825cefe8196) EffectiveMembership.log_id to Option<LogId>; by 张炎泼; 2022-04-05

-   Changed: [67375a2a](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/67375a2a44cb06a84815df1119c28dcf2681f842) RaftStorage: use `EffectiveMembership` instead of `Option<_>`; by 张炎泼; 2022-04-05

-   Changed: [ffc82682](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/ffc8268233d87eaccd6099e77340f706c0b5c3cc) rename ReplicationMetrics and methods in MetricsChangeFlags; by 张炎泼; 2022-04-05

    - Change: rename ReplicationMetrics to ReplicationTargetMetrics

    - Change: rename LeaderMetrics to ReplicationMetrics

-   Changed: [7b1d4660](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/7b1d4660d449d6f35230d0253e9564612cdfb7e0) rename RaftMetrics.leader_metrics to replication; by 张炎泼; 2022-04-06

-   Changed: [30b485b7](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/30b485b744647fd4d5ca711d202a1dc0c59e2aff) rename State to ServerState; by 张炎泼; 2022-04-16

-   Changed: [ca8a09c1](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/ca8a09c1898dbcaa4c2bf49bf5dabc5221e0b908) rename InitialState to RaftState; by 张炎泼; 2022-04-16

-   Changed: [8496a48a](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/8496a48a87373eab13117d1e62d4d2faf42918ca) add error `Fatal::Panicked`, storing RaftCore panic; by 张炎泼; 2022-05-09

    Changes:

    - Add `committed_membership` to RaftState, to store the previous
      committed membership config.

    - Change: `RaftStorage::get_membership()` returns a vec of at most 2 memberships.

    - Change: `RaftStorage::last_membership_in_log()` returns a vec of at most 2 memberships.

-   Changed: [1f645feb](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/1f645feb3ff4a747d944213c431ebb37f36e4d6b) add `last_membership` to `SnapshotMeta`; by 张炎泼; 2022-05-12

-   Changed: [bf4e0497](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/bf4e049762c5cf333381363942260f27a435432d) Make serde optional; by devillve084; 2022-05-22

-   Changed: [b96803cc](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/b96803ccd085a19a21fc7a99451543d6ef1dee1d) `external_request()` replace the 1st arg ServerState with RaftState; by 张炎泼; 2022-06-08

    This change let user do more things with a external fn request.

-   Changed: [d81c7279](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/d81c72792b3a3441df6953b3f174e82a8f3b6985) after shutdown(), it should return an error when accessing Raft, instead of panicking.; by devillve084; 2022-06-16

-   Changed: [0de003ce](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/0de003ce732122437be0e116f10fcf94a8731075) remove `RaftState.last_log_id` and `RaftState.last_purged_log_id`; by 张炎泼; 2022-06-22

    Remove these two fields, which are already included in
    `RaftState.log_ids`; use `last_log_id()` and `last_purged_log_id()`
    instead.

-   Changed: [7f00948d](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/7f00948d5e1d09d9c2e61dd5c69cd2f6ef3cddbe) API: cleanup APIs in Membership and EffectiveMembership; by 张炎泼; 2022-06-29

    - Refactor: move impl of `QuorumSet` from `Membership` to `EffectiveMembership`.

      Add a field `EffectiveMembership.quorum_set`, to store a
      `QuorumSet` built from the `Membership` config. This quorum set can have
      a different structure from the `Membership`, to optimized quorum check.

    - Refactor: impl methods in `Membership` or `EffectiveMembership` with
      Iterator if possible.

    - Refactor: use term `voter` and `learner` for methods and fields.

-   Changed: [01a16d08](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/01a16d0814f52ca05dbd2d7876d759bb3d696b33) remove `tx` from `spawn_replication_stream()`; by 张炎泼; 2022-07-01

    Replication should not be responsible invoke the callback when
    replication become up to date. It makes the logic dirty.
    Such a job can be done by watching the metrics change.

    - Change: API: AddLearnerResponse has a new field `membership_log_id`
      which is the log id of the membership log that contains the newly
      added learner.

-   Changed: [6b9ae52f](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/6b9ae52fa98ea09c20d30a67759c40e09ab2e407) remove error `AddLearnerError::Exists`; by 张炎泼; 2022-07-01

    Even when the learner to add already exists, the caller may still want
    to block until the replication catches up. Thus it does not expect an
    error.

    And `Exists` is not an issue the caller has to deal with, it does not
    have to be an error.

-   Changed: [d7afc721](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/d7afc721414ac3e55c84f8ae304ad6ea8db1b697) move default impl methods in `RaftStorage` to `StorageHelper`.; by 张炎泼; 2022-07-01

    - `get_initial_state()`
    - `get_log_id()`
    - `get_membership()`
    - `last_membership_in_log()`

    In the trait `RaftStorage`, these methods provide several default
    methods that users do not need to care about. It should no longer
    be methods that user may need to implement.

    To upgrade:

    If you have been using these methods, replace `sto.xxx()` with
    `StorageHelper::new(&mut sto).xxx()`.

-   Changed: [a010fddd](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/a010fddda6294ee3155e15df15a6b67bd27b33a1) Stop replication to removed node at once when new membership is seen; by 张炎泼; 2022-07-12

    Before this commit, when membership changes, e.g., from a joint config
    `[(1,2,3), (3,4,5)]` to uniform config `[3,4,5]`(assuming the leader is
    `3`), the leader stops replication to `1,2` when `[3,4,5]` is
    committed.

    This is an unnecessarily complicated solution.
    It is OK for the leader to stop replication to `1,2` as soon as config `[3,4,5]` is seen, instead of when config `[3,4,5]` is committed.

    - If the leader(`3`) finally committed `[3,4,5]`, it will eventually stop replication to `1,2`.
    - If the leader(`3`) crashes before committing `[3,4,5]`:
      - And a new leader sees the membership config log `[3,4,5]`, it will continue to commit it and finally stop replication to `1,2`.
      - Or a new leader does not see membership config log `[3,4,5]`, it will re-establish replication to `1,2`.

    In any case, stopping replication at once is OK.

    One of the considerations about this modification is:
    The nodes, e.g., `1,2` do not know they have been removed from the cluster:

    - Removed node will enter the candidate state and keeps increasing its term and electing itself.
      This won't affect the working cluster:

      - The nodes in the working cluster have greater logs; thus, the election will never succeed.

      - The leader won't try to communicate with the removed nodes thus it won't see their higher `term`.

    - Removed nodes should be shut down finally. No matter whether the
      leader replicates the membership without these removed nodes to them,
      there should always be an external process that shuts them down.
      Because there is no guarantee that a removed node can receive the
      membership log in a finite time.

    Changes:

    - Change: remove config `remove_replication`, since replication will
      be removed at once.

    - Refactor: Engine outputs `Command::UpdateReplicationStream` to inform
      the Runtime to update replication, when membership changes.

    - Refactor: remove `ReplicationState.failures`, replication does not
      need count failures to remove it.

    - Refactor: remove `ReplicationState.matched`: the **matched** log id
      has been tracked by `Engine.state.leader.progress`.

    - Fix: #446

-   Changed: [2d1aff03](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/2d1aff03bbf264de0d43f0e84db10a968febf1c6) error InProgress: add field `committed`; by 张炎泼; 2022-07-15

    - Refactor: Simplify Engine command executor

-   Changed: [8c7f0857](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/8c7f08576db05d3a5e62236c77b32436afb2e6f8) remove ClientWriteRequest; by 张炎泼; 2022-08-01

    Remove struct `ClientWriteRequest`.
    `ClientWriteRequest` is barely a wrapper that does not provide any
    additional function.

    `Raft::client_write(ClientWriteRequest)` is changed to
    `Raft::client_write(app_data: D)`, where `D` is application defined
    `AppData` implementation.

-   Changed: [565b6921](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/565b692102ac8810b7b67a87c04a619110da8fc1) `ErrorSubject::Snapshot(SnapshotSignature)`; by 张炎泼; 2022-08-02

    Change `ErrorSubject::Snapshot(SnapshotMeta)` to `ErrorSubject::Snapshot(SnapshotSignature)`.

    `SnapshotSignature` is the same as `SnapshotMeta` except it does not include
    `Membership` information.
    This way errors do not have to depend on type `Node`, which is used in
    `Membership` and it is a application specific type.

    Then when a user-defined generic type `NodeData` is introduced, error
    types do not need to change.

    - Part of: #480

-   Changed: [e4b705ca](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/e4b705cabbc417b2ef6569a31b2ba83a71cac41e) Turn `Node` into a trait (#480); by Heinz N. Gies; 2022-08-03

    Structs that depend on `Node` now have to implement `trait Node`,  or use a predefined basic implementation `BasicNode`. E.g., `struct Membership` now has two type parameters: `impl<NID, N> Membership<NID, N> where N: Node, NID: NodeId`.

-   Changed: [c836355a](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/c836355a10cc90c7ede0062e29c0c21214667271) `Membership.nodes` remove `Option` from value; by 张炎泼; 2022-08-04

    Before this commit, the value of `Membership.nodes` is `Option<N:
    Node>`: `Membership.nodes: BTreeMap<NID, Option<N>>`

    The value does not have to be an `Option`.
    If an application does not need openraft to store the `Node` data, it
    can just implement `trait Node` with an empty struct, or just use
    `BasicNode` as a placeholder.

    - Using `Option<N>` as the value is a legacy and since #480 is merged, we
      do not need the `Option` any more.

-   Changed: [70e3318a](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/70e3318abb13aca60b91f98dfcedba2bcb99ee0e) SnapshotMeta.last_log_id from LogId to Option of LogId; by 张炎泼; 2022-08-17

    `SnapshotMeta.last_log_id` should be the same type as
    `StateMachine.last_applied`.

    By making `SnapshotMeta.last_log_id` an Option of LogId, a snapshot can
    be build on an empty state-machine(in which `last_applied` is None).

-   Changed: [d0d04b28](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/d0d04b28fedc10b05a41d818ff7e3de77f246cb8) only purge logs that are in snapshot; by 张炎泼; 2022-08-28

    Let `snapshot+logs` be a complete state of a raft node.

    The Assumption before is `state_machine+logs` is a complete state of a
    raft node. This requires state machine to persist the state every time
    applying a log, which would be an innecessary overhead.

    - Change: remove ENV config entries. Do not let a lib be affected by
      environment variables.

    - Change: remove `Config.keep_unsnapshoted_log`: now by default, logs
      not included in snapshot won't be deleted.

      Rename `Config.max_applied_log_to_keep` to `max_in_snapshot_log_to_keep`.

-   Changed: [3111e7e6](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/3111e7e6c8649f7068f959bc58e484f3b95732bb) RaftStorage::install_snapshot() does not need to return state changes; by 张炎泼; 2022-08-28

    The caller of `RaftStorage::install_snapshot()` knows about what changes
    have been made, the return value is unnecessary.

-   Changed: [a12fd8e4](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/a12fd8e410ca8cf33a9c264224640b1b1045e41e) remove error MissingNodeInfo; by 张炎泼; 2022-11-02

    Because in a membership the type `Node` is not an `Option` any more,
    `MissingNodeInfo` error will never occur.

-   Changed: [dbeae332](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/dbeae332190b7724297d50834b6583de11009923) rename `IntoOptionNodes` to `IntoNodes`; by 张炎泼; 2022-11-02

-   Changed: [e8ec9c50](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/e8ec9c50b2f17e8e021481e61406c74c7c26adaa) EffectiveMembership::get_node() should return an Option; by 张炎泼; 2022-11-02

    `EffectiveMembership::get_node()` should return an `Option<&Node>`
    instead of a `&Node`.
    Otherwise it panic if the node is not found.

-   Changed: [93116312](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/9311631264074307974a61d9b37e6c5026983abc) remove error NodeNotFound; by 张炎泼; 2022-12-28

    A node is stored in `Membership` thus it should always be found.
    Otherwise it is a bug of openraft.
    In either case, there is no need for an application to deal with
    `RPCError::NodeNotFound` error.

    An application that needs such an error should define it as an
    application error.

    - Migration guide:
      if you do have been using it, you could just replace `NodeNotFound` with `NetworkError`.

    - Fix: #623

-   Changed: [e1238428](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/e123842862ac91860352afc48a48f19f011e7ab7) RaftState: add field snapshot_meta; by 张炎泼; 2022-12-30

    Snapshot meta should be part of the `RaftState`.
    Move it from `Engine` to `RaftState`

-   Changed: [2dd81018](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/2dd81018b54a74d46af6412048b2f057bb35c56e) make Raft::new() async and let it return error during startup; by 张炎泼; 2023-01-02

    - Change: move startup process from `RaftCore::do_main()` to `Raft::new()`, so
      that an error during startup can be returned earlier.

      Upgrade guide: application has to consume the returned future with
      `Raft::new().await`, and the error returned by the future.

    - Refactor: move id from `Engine.id` to `Engine.config.id`, so that accessing
      constant attribute does not depend on a reference to `Engine`.

-   Changed: [3d5e0016](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/3d5e00169962bac198c71b46db61cccbae59fa9b) A restarted leader should enter leader state at once, without another round of election; by 张炎泼; 2023-01-04

    - Test: single-node restart test does not expect the node to run
      election any more.

    - Refactor: add VoteHandler to handle vote related operations.

    - Change: make ServerState default value `Learner`.

    - Fix: #607

-   Changed: [77e87a39](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/77e87a39401af0cd2f8b1f74b3aeb5962e8e6715) remove InitializeError::NotAMembershipEntry error; by 张炎泼; 2023-02-12

    Such an error can only be caused by internal calls. An application do
    not need to handle it.

-   Changed: [fbb3f211](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/fbb3f211a043e5d5468426334943e189c5a6d8ff) add RaftError as API return error type.; by 张炎泼; 2023-02-12

    Add `RaftError<E>` as error type returned by every `Raft::xxx()` API.
    RaftError has two variants: Fatal error or API specific error.
    This way every API error such as AppendEntriesError does not have to include
    an `Fatal` in it.

    Upgrade tip:

    The affected types is mainly `trait RaftNetwork`, an application should
    replace AppendEntriesError, VoteError, InstallSnapshotError with
    `RaftError<_>`, `RaftError<_>`, and `RaftError<_, InstallSnapshotError>`.

    So is for other parts, e.g., `Raft::append_entries()` now returns
    `Result<AppendEntriesResponse, RaftError<_>>`, an application should
    also rewrite error handling that calls these APIs.

    See changes in examples/.

-   Changed: [d1b3b232](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/d1b3b23219433ff594d7249e086bd1e95ef5b8e5) remove RaftNetworkFactory::ConnectionError and AddLearnerError::NetworkError; by 张炎泼; 2023-02-12

    `RaftNetworkFactory::new_client()` does not return an error because
    openraft can only ignore it.  Therefore it should **not** create a
    connection but rather a client that will connect when required.  Thus
    there is chance it will build a client that is unable to send out
    anything, e.g., in case the Node network address is configured
    incorrectly.

    Because of the above change, And `AddLearnerError` will not include a
    NetworkError any more, because when adding a learner, the connectivity
    cannot be effectively detected.

    Upgrade tip:

    Just update the application network implementation so that it compiles.

-   Changed: [0161a3d2](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/0161a3d21f70f19fb12994cda950ccaea93dc8b4) remove AddLearnerResponse and AddLearnerError; by 张炎泼; 2023-02-17

    In openraft adds a learner is done by committing a membership config
    log, which is almost the same as committing any log.

    `AddLearnerResponse` contains a field `matched` to indicate the
    replication state to the learner, which is not included in
    `ClientWriteResponse`. This information can be retrieved via
    `Raft::metrics()`.

    Therefore to keep the API simple, replace `AddLearnerResponse` with
    `ClientWriteResponse`.

    Behavior change: adding a learner always commit a new membership config
    log, no matter if it already exists in membership.
    To avoid duplicated add, an application should check existence first by
    examining `Raft::metrics()`

    - Fix: #679

    Upgrade tips:

    - Replace AddLearnerResponse with ClientWriteResponse
    - Replace AddLearnerError with ClientWriteError

    Passes the application compilation.

    See the changes in examples/.

-   Changed: [9906d6e9](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/9906d6e9c01f1aa73e747f863dfe0a866915045f) remove non-blocking membership change; by 张炎泼; 2023-02-18

    When changing membership in nonblocking mode, the leader submits a
    membership config log but does not wait for the log to be committed.

    This is useless because the caller has to assert the log is
    committed, by periodically querying the metrics of a raft node, until it
    is finally committed. Which actually makes it a blocking routine.

    API changes:

    - Removes `allow_lagging` parameter from `Raft::change_membership()`
    - Removes error `LearnerIsLagging`

    Upgrade tip:

    Adjust API calls to make it compile.

    Refactor: move `leader_append_entries()` to `LeaderHandler`.

-   Changed: [f591726a](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/f591726a1a9e51b88c31c1228fa1034b62d1e777) trait IntoNodes adds two new method has_nodes() and node_ids(); by 张炎泼; 2023-02-19

    `trait IntoNodes` converts types `T` such as `Vec` or `BTreeSet` into
    `BTreeMap<NID, Node>`.

    This patch changes the functionality of the `IntoNodes` trait to provide
    two new methods `has_nodes()` and `node_ids()`, in addition to the existing
    `into_nodes()` method. The `has_nodes()` method returns true if the type `T`
    contains any `Node` objects, and `node_ids()` returns a `Vec` of the `NodeId`
    objects associated with the `Node` objects in `T`.

    Refactor:

    The patch also refactors the `Membership::next_safe()` method to return an
    `Err(LearnerNotFound)` if it attempts to build a `Membership` object
    containing a `voter_id` that does not correspond to any `Node`.

-   Changed: [55217aa4](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/55217aa4786bee66b5cfac2662e1770434afb73f) move default implemented method from trait `RaftLogReader` to `StorageHelper`; by 张炎泼; 2023-02-21

    Function `get_log_entries()` and `try_get_log_entry()` are provided by
    trait `RaftLogReader` with default implementations. However, they do not
    need to be part of this trait and an application does not have to
    implement them.

    Therefore in this patch they are moved to `StorageHelper` struct, which
    provides additional storage access methods that are built based on the
    `RaftStorage` trait.

-   Changed: [0a1dd3d6](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/0a1dd3d69557f412f7e8ecd5b903408308090a96) replace EffectiveMembership with StoredMembership in RaftStorage; by 张炎泼; 2023-02-26

    `EffectiveMembership` is a struct used at runtime, which contains
    additional information such as an optimized `QuorumSet` implementation
    that has different structure from a `Membership`.

    To better separate concerns, a new struct called `StoredMembership` has
    been introduced specifically for storage purpose. It contains only the
    information that needs to be stored in storage. Therefore,
    `StoredMembership` is used instead of `EffectiveMembership` in
    RaftStorage.

    Upgrade tip:

    Replace `EffectiveMembership` with `StoredMembership` in an application.

    Fields in `EffectiveMembership` are made private and can be accessed via
    corresponding methods such as: `EffectiveMembership.log_id` and
    `EffectiveMembership.membership` should be replaced with
    `EffectiveMembership::log_id()` and `EffectiveMembership::membership()`.

### Added:

-   Added: [966eb287](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/966eb287ff9bc98112b7b5d69253cca2d86277f8) use a version to track metrics change; by 张炎泼; 2022-03-03

    Add `Versioned<D>` to track changes of an `Arc<D>`.

    In openraft, some frequently updated object such metrics are wrapped
    in an `Arc`, and some modification is made in place: by storing an
    `AtomicU64`.

-   Added: [80f89134](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/80f89134533be18675c5686e1b9787777096f624) Add support for external requests to be executed inside of Raft core loop; by Ivan Schréter; 2022-03-05

    The new feature is also exposed via `RaftRouter` test fixture and tested in the initialization test (in addition to the original checks).

-   Added: [2a5c1b9e](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/2a5c1b9e8de7e96e79b917429e0ea70a23ef51ae) add feature-flag: `bt` enables backtrace; by 张炎泼; 2022-03-12

-   Added: [16406aec](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/16406aec6c4bcbe3818e2409d56aa74f534dead9) add error NotAllowed; by 张炎泼; 2022-04-06

-   Added: [a8655446](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/a86554469c8d7efc28d68c6fd799aa588c08f53f) InitialState: add `last_purged_log_id`; by 张炎泼; 2022-04-07

-   Added: [6f20e1fc](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/6f20e1fc80fa59cc758eff731663f3becc89671c) add trait `RaftPayload` `RaftEntry` to access payload and entry without the need to know about user data, i.e., `AppData` or `AppDataResponse`.; by 张炎泼; 2022-04-07

-   Added: [67c870e2](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/67c870e2f5141e55d9107942f452f26f2c030cdd) add err: NotAMembershipEntry, NotInMembers; by 张炎泼; 2022-04-16

-   Added: [675a0f8f](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/675a0f8f09720fd1d74635024f3d72aa1cf3b2cf) Engine stores log ids; by 张炎泼; 2022-04-16

-   Added: [2262c79f](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/2262c79f5195307402e7a0994771b4152c0d10b2) LogIdList: add method purge() to delete log ids; by 张炎泼; 2022-05-08

-   Added: [ff898cde](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/ff898cdef508f411a57780a919788beab5ff3fea) Engine: add method: purge_log(); by 张炎泼; 2022-05-08

-   Added: [4d0918f2](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/4d0918f261d32e28593ac81da87e7cf4e7ccb752) Add rocks based example; by Heinz N. Gies; 2022-07-05

-   Added: [86eb2981](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/86eb29812b9433cc6f25ce21fa873447bf94fe2e) Raft::enable_tick() to enable or disable election timeout; by 张炎泼; 2022-07-31

-   Added: [956177df](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/956177df8f57e46240ae1abf283bdd49aa9d8b85) use blank log for heartbeat (#483); by 张炎泼; 2022-08-01

    * Feature: use blank log for heartbeat

    Heartbeat in standard raft is the way for a leader to assert it is still alive.
    - A leader send heartbeat at a regular interval.
    - A follower that receives a heartbeat believes there is an active leader thus it rejects election request(`send_vote`) from another node unreachable to the leader, for a short period.

    Openraft heartbeat is a blank log

    Such a heartbeat mechanism depends on clock time.
    But raft as a distributed consensus already has its own **pseudo time** defined very well.
    The **pseudo time** in openraft is a tuple `(vote, last_log_id)`, compared in dictionary order.

    Why it works

    To refuse the election by a node that does not receive recent messages from the current leader,
    just let the active leader send a **blank log** to increase the **pseudo time** on a quorum.

    Because the leader must have the greatest **pseudo time**,
    thus by comparing the **pseudo time**, a follower automatically refuse election request from a node unreachable to the leader.

    And comparing the **pseudo time** is already done by `handle_vote_request()`,
    there is no need to add another timer for the active leader.

    Other changes:

    - Feature: add API to switch timeout based events:
      - `Raft::enable_tick()`: switch on/off election and heartbeat.
      - `Raft::enable_heartbeat()`: switch on/off heartbeat.
      - `Raft::enable_elect()`: switch on/off election.

      These methods make some testing codes easier to write.
      The corresponding `Config` entries are also added:
      `Config::enable_tick`
      `Config::enable_heartbeat`
      `Config::enable_elect`

    - Refactor: remove Engine `Command::RejectElection`.
      Rejecting election now is part of `handle_vote_req()` as blank-log
      heartbeat is introduced.

    - Refactor: heartbeat is removed from `ReplicationCore`.
      Instead, heartbeat is emitted by `RaftCore`.

    - Fix: when failed to sending append-entries, do not clear
      `need_to_replicate` flag.

    - CI: add test with higher network delay.

    - Doc: explain why using blank log as heartbeat.

    - Fix: #151

-   Added: [b6817758](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/b6817758c19c3aaf43b9dafd7612b2a1ca897a51) add `Raft::trigger_elect()` and `Raft::trigger_heartbeat()` to let user manually trigger a election or send a heartbeat log; by 张炎泼; 2022-08-06

-   Added: [f437cda0](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/f437cda09c0112f63913cbea29a7b02c66d5e897) add Raft::trigger_snapshot() to manually trigger to build snapshot at once; by 张炎泼; 2022-08-07

-   Added: [eae08515](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/eae085155ac58b87749fdd1d57febb26e4d14835) Added sled store example based on rocks example; by kus; 2022-08-16

-   Added: [07a2a677](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/07a2a6774d909a4d086fd86e7cd2f75ff1fa58eb) adding a snapshot finalize timeout config; by Zach Schoenberger; 2022-11-09

-   Added: [2877be0c](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/2877be0c890d8ef2be9d2ebbd36d0b48d3bd3620) add config: send_snapshot_timeout; by Zach Schoenberger; 2022-11-09

-   Added: [541e9d36](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/541e9d36ba5f26115e2698068ebd23f9bf0236b0) add "Inflight" to store info about inflight replication data; by 张炎泼; 2023-01-17

-   Added: [4a85ee93](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/4a85ee936856ce6bfde4c8cc6c58e15b00971257) feature flag "single-term-leader": standard raft mode; by 张炎泼; 2023-02-13

    With this feature on: only one leader can be elected in each term, but
    reduce LogId size from `LogId:{term, node_id, index}` to `LogId{term, index}`.

    Add `CommittedLeaderId` as the leader-id type used in `LogId`:
    The leader-id used in `LogId` can be different(smaller) from leader-id used
    in `Vote`, depending on `LeaderId` definition.
    `CommittedLeaderId` is the smallest data that can identify a leader
    after the leadership is granted by a quorum(committed).

    Change: Vote stores a LeaderId in it.

    ```rust
    // Before
    pub struct Vote<NID> {
        pub term: u64,
        pub node_id: NID,
        pub committed: bool,
    }

    // After
    pub struct Vote<NID> {
        #[cfg_attr(feature = "serde", serde(flatten))]
        pub leader_id: LeaderId<NID>,

        pub committed: bool,
    }
    ```

    Upgrade tip:

    If you manually serialize `Vote`, i.e., without using
    `serde`, the serialization part should be rewritten.

    Otherwise, nothing needs to be done.

    - Fix: #660

-   Added: [4f4b05f6](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/4f4b05f6e03042030ff44f58c651c86ecdfc8f4a) add v07-v08 compatible store rocksstore-compat07; by 张炎泼; 2023-02-25
