### Changed:

-   Changed: [342d0de2](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/342d0de2b885388dfa5de64430384bd3275d3697) rename variants in ChangeMembers, add `AddVoters`; by 张炎泼; 2023-03-01

    Rename `ChangeMembers::AddVoter` to `AddVoterIds`, because it just
    updates voter ids.

    Rename `ChangeMembers::RemoveVoter` to `RemoveVoters`.

    Add `ChangeMembers::AddVoters(BTreeMap)` to add voters with
    corresponding `Node`, i.e., it adds nodes as learners and update
    the voter-ids in a `Membership`.

### Added:

-   Added: [50821c37](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/50821c37035850dba9e237d9e7474e918f2bd410) impl PartialEq for Entry; by 张炎泼; 2023-03-02

### Fixed:

-   Fixed: [97fa1581](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/97fa15815a7d51c35a3a613b11defbf5f49cf4c1) discard blank log heartbeat, revert to the standard heartbeat; by 张炎泼; 2023-03-04

    - https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/issues/698

    The blank log heartbeat design has two problems:

    - The heartbeat that sends a blank log introduces additional I/O, as a follower has to persist every log to maintain correctness.

    - Although `(term, log_index)` serves as a pseudo time in Raft, measuring whether a node has caught up with the leader and is capable of becoming a new leader, leadership is not solely determined by this pseudo time.
      Wall clock time is also taken into account.

      There may be a case where the pseudo time is not up to date but the clock time is, and the node should not become the leader.
      For example, in a cluster of three nodes, if the leader (node-1) is busy sending a snapshot to node-2(it has not yet replicated the latest logs to a quorum, but node-2 received message from the leader(node-1), thus it knew there is an active leader), node-3 should not seize leadership from node-1.
      This is why there needs to be two types of time, pseudo time `(term, log_index)` and wall clock time, to protect leadership.

      In the follow graph:
      - node-1 is the leader, has 4 log entries, and is sending a snapshot to
          node-2,
      - node-2 received several chunks of snapshot, and it perceived an active
          leader thus extended leader lease.
      - node-3 tried to send vote request to node-2, although node-2 do not have
          as many logs as node-3, it should still reject node-3's vote request
          because the leader lease has not yet expired.

      In the obsolete design, extending pseudo time `(term, index)` with a
      `tick`, in this case node-3 will seize the leadership from node-2.

      ```text
      Ni: Node i
      Ei: log entry i

      N1 E1 E2 E3 E4
            |
            v
      N2    snapshot
            +-----------------+
                     ^        |
                     |        leader lease
                     |
      N3 E1 E2 E3    | vote-request
      ---------------+----------------------------> clock time
                     now

      ```

    The original document is presented below for reference.

-   Fixed: [b5caa44d](https://github.com/databendlabs/openraft/commit/b5caa44d1aac0b539180c1c490f0883dcc83048a) Wait::members() should not count learners as members; by 张炎泼; 2023-03-04

    `Wait::members()` waits until membership becomes the expected value.
    It should not check against all nodes.
    Instead, it should only check voters, excluding learners.
