Summary:

- Fixed:
    -   [0b1293f3](https://github.com/datafuselabs/openraft/commit/0b1293f3499de8d2e3dfb7b0d06f37e08c8ac759) Should not update `vote` when seeing higher vote in `RequestVote` response.
    -   [94b1e843](https://github.com/datafuselabs/openraft/commit/94b1e84374e52bdc2e317d7abf5cfa9fb1970254) Clarify that receiving an equal vote does not grant leadership.
- Added:
    -   [5f5d7e9f](https://github.com/datafuselabs/openraft/commit/5f5d7e9f60ff2e86af078d2c20401636de2c19f7) Add `TypeConfigExt` to simplify `RaftTypeConfig` Access.

Detail:

### Fixed:

-   Fixed: [0b1293f3](https://github.com/datafuselabs/openraft/commit/0b1293f3499de8d2e3dfb7b0d06f37e08c8ac759) Should not update `vote` when seeing higher vote in `RequestVote` response; by 张炎泼; 2024-07-04

    This commit addresses an issue in the vote updating mechanism during the
    handling of `RequestVote` responses. Previously, encountering a higher
    `vote` in a response incorrectly led to an update of the local
    `state.vote`, which could break Raft consistency rules.

    **Issue Description:**
    - A higher `vote` seen in a `RequestVote` response does not necessarily
      mean that the vote is granted. The local `state.vote` should only be
      updated if the vote is actually granted, i.e., the responding node has
      a higher `vote` and a `last_log_id` that allows it to become a leader.

    **Resolution:**
    - The local `state.vote` will no longer be updated upon merely seeing a
      higher `vote` in the `RequestVote` response. Instead, this higher vote
      will be recorded in `last_seen_vote` for consideration in the next
      election cycle, without updating the current `state.vote`.

    This bug is introduced in: f0a9e34b12bc937170803dc60a4e2c12de9212ef

-   Fixed: [94b1e843](https://github.com/datafuselabs/openraft/commit/94b1e84374e52bdc2e317d7abf5cfa9fb1970254) Clarify that receiving an equal vote does not grant leadership.; by 张炎泼; 2024-08-28

    A node's `vote` may be updated when a leader observes a higher vote.
    In such cases, the leader updates its local vote and steps down.
    However, this vote update does not imply that the node accepts the
    higher vote as valid for leadership, as it has not yet compared their
    logs.

    In this commit, re-enable `VoteResponse.vote_granted` to indicate a vote
    is granted.

    This commit also fix:

    - Fix: #1236

### Added:

-   Added: [5f5d7e9f](https://github.com/datafuselabs/openraft/commit/5f5d7e9f60ff2e86af078d2c20401636de2c19f7) Add `TypeConfigExt` to simplify `RaftTypeConfig` Access; by 张炎泼; 2024-07-03

    This commit introduces a new trait, `TypeConfigExt`, which extends
    `RaftTypeConfig`. The purpose of this trait is to simplify the access to
    various functionalities provided by the `RaftTypeConfig` trait,
    enhancing code readability and reducing complexity.

    **Methods Added to `TypeConfigExt`:**
    - `now()`
    - `sleep()`
    - `sleep_until()`
    - `timeout()`
    - `timeout_at()`
    - `oneshot()`
    - `spawn()`

    **Usage Improvement:**
    - Instead of using the
      `<<C as RaftTypeConfig>::AsyncRuntime as AsyncRuntime>::Instant::now()`,
      you can now simply call `C::now()`.
